---
chapter: 4
section: 2
title: "Section 2: The Fair Debt Collection Practices Act"
id: ch4-s2
indexable: true
---

# Section 2: The Fair Debt Collection Practices Act

If your medical bill goes unpaid past the due date, the health care provider will send you invoices trying to get you to pay or they will turn the debt over to a billing agency working on their behalf or sell the debt to a third-party debt collector who will then try to get you to pay. They might call you, send you letters, texts or emails and maybe even threaten to sue you or report the debt to a credit reporting agency (which is now unlawful in New Jersey). If the bill is not paid, a Payment Plan is not completed or any dispute is not resolved, it is likely that a lawsuit will be filed against you, which will be discussed later, in Section 3 of this chapter. This section is about how to deal with the debt collection process, before you are sued, and might even help prevent a lawsuit.

## New Jersey State Law Protections

The [Louisa Carman Medical Debt Relief Act](https://pub.njleg.state.nj.us/Bills/2024/PL24/48_.PDF) created three new requirements concerning when medical debt collection can begin. All of them go into effect in July 2025:

1. Efforts to collect medical debt cannot start until at least 120 days after the first bill has been sent. So, if you start hearing from anyone trying to collect medical debt sooner than that, let them know that is against the law. They will probably try again later but it does buy you some time.
2. Debt collectors are not allowed to start collecting a medical debt if they know that the insurance company has not resolved the patient’s claim for coverage of the care. Also, if the insurer has denied the claim or paid less than it should have and the patient is appealing the denial or the amount of coverage, collection cannot start until the appeals resolved. This is true even if the 120 days have gone by. **The collection agency must wait to come after you until any insurance questions are finally resolved.**
3. Even after 120 days, neither the health provider nor a debt collector can try to collect a medical debt until one of them has offered you a “Reasonable Payment Plan.” So, if you have not been offered such a plan, let them know that they must stop calling or texting you until you are offered a Plan. The Plan has to be “reasonable” in terms of how much you have to pay per month, which can be no more than 3% of your monthly income, and over what period of time, which can be as long as five years. If you reject the Plan or if you accept it and later fail to make the payments, they can come after you again to collect. If you did not make your payments according to your Payment Plan, you must be given at least a 60-day grace period on the missed payment.

There is one more important thing the Louisa Carman Act does that you need to be aware of when a debt collector contacts you trying to collect a medical debt. Under the law, which prohibits the reporting of medical debt to the credit bureaus, any medical debt that does get reported in violation of the law becomes automatically void and you no longer have any obligation to pay it. So, check your credit reports and if a medical debt appears there for services performed after the July 22, 2024 date that the law went into effect, you are off the hook and should so inform the debt collector.

**The most important thing to keep in mind when debt collectors come after you is DO NOT IGNORE THEM and hope the problem will go away.** The details of the debt and the actions of the collectors are important and may influence your response, but the worst thing you can do is not respond and let things escalate. How you decide to respond must be based on an understanding of your rights, whether you have been offered a Reasonable Payment Plan, whether you believe the bill is accurate, whether you are appealing a denial of your claim by the insurance company and possibly other factors depending on your individual circumstances

That said, regarding debts (including medical debts) that are older than six years and thus no longer enforceable in court, New Jersey case law provides special protection. If a debt is older than six years, debt collectors can still try to collect such “zombie debt” but can no longer sue you over it. In many if not most states, such debt can be revived if you acknowledge its validity to the debt collector or pay or agree to pay even a small portion of it, which is deemed to start the Statute of Limitations again. It does not work that way in New Jersey thanks to a 2016 court decision, _Midland Funding LLC v. Thiel_, 446 N.J. Super. 537 (App. Div. 2016). There, an appeals court held in a binding precedent that once the six-year Statute of Limitations starts because of a default in payment, no payment or other action at any time starts the clock running again. The court further held that a debt collector who sues over an expired debt has violated the Fair Debt Collection Practices Act unless they can show it was a “bona fide” or good faith error

## Federal Law Protections

Once the debt collectors start trying to collect from you, they must follow a federal law known as the [Fair Debt Collection Practices Act](https://www.ftc.gov/legal-library/browse/rules/fair-debt-collection-practices-act-text), or FDCPA, which prohibits unfair, deceptive, or abusive practices by debt collectors, including lawyers (unless the lawyers are trying to collect legal fees from their own clients). Federal debt collection regulations have also been enacted in a group of regulations referred to as [Regulation F](https://www.consumerfinance.gov/rules-policy/regulations/1006/) (which went into effect on November 30, 2021).

The FDCPA protects the person who incurred the debt and, if the person who incurred the debt is deceased, it applies to efforts to collect the debt from their parent or spouse or whoever represents their estate. In general, the law is intended to protect the “least sophisticated consumer.” This standard is considered by courts to be objective; it pays no attention to the circumstances of the particular debtor in question, and asks only whether the hypothetical least sophisticated consumer could reasonably interpret the representation made by the debt collector to be inaccurate. This standard is used by all federal and state courts in New Jersey when a consumer sues or counterclaims for violations of the FDCPA.

The law does not cover business debts, only debts primarily for personal, family and household purposes, including medical debt, as well as credit card debt, car loans, mortgage payments and student loans. It also generally does not apply to those seeking to collect their own debts, including a hospital, medical practice or individual health care provider, unless they use a different name to imply that a third party is involved. This is the case because health care providers themselves are assumed to be less likely to engage in unfair, deceptive and abusive practices against their own patients, in contrast to companies or people that buy medical debt or are paid to collect it, who ARE more likely to engage in those practices and are covered by the law.

## Key FDCPA Protections

- In any contact with you, either written or oral, the debt collector must state up front that the communication is from a debt collector.
- The law prohibits collectors from contacting you at times or places they know or should know are inconvenient to you. So, generally, not before 8 a.m. or after 9 p.m., and not at work if you are not allowed to receive personal communications there. If they call and you tell them it is inconvenient, they must end the call.
- They are also not allowed to harass you or anyone else about your debt with repeated calls or other contacts via text or email. They must have your consent to send you texts or emails an the consent only lasts 60 days and has to be renewed after that. Emails and texts must contain clear language that allows you to opt out of receiving them. You, as a consumer, have the right t stop specific types of communications, and may opt out of receiving any electronic communications.
- Debt collectors cannot use obscene or profane language. They are also prohibited from using social media to post publicly about a debt you owe, though they can use it to contact you privately. They cannot make false threats of legal action.
- If the debt collector knows you have a lawyer, they have to stop contacting you and contact the lawyer instead, so if a debt collector contacts you, give them you lawyer’s name and contact info. Avoid responding to them directly because if you do, they are allowed to bypass your lawyer in getting back to you.
- Debt collectors must provide two types of notice to consumers under the FDCPA:
  1. The first, mentioned above, is that if they send you any type of electronic communication –a text, email or any other electronic medium that uses a specific address – that message must contain clear and conspicuous language telling you that you have the right to opt out of being contacted electronically in that way and it must also describe a “reasonable and simple method” for you to do that.
  2. The second and more significant is a Debt Validation Notice which must be sent with the initial communication by the debt collector or within five days of that first contact. It consists of certain key information about the debt so that you can tell if it is valid and includes information about what to do if it is not. The required information includes the name of the creditor to whom the debt is currently owed; the name and address of the debt collector; the name and address of the one who owes the debt (presumably you); the debt details and the current amount due, along with itemization showing any interest charges, fees, payments and credits. The full list is [here](https://www.consumerfinance.gov/ask-cfpb/what-information-does-a-debt-collector-have-to-give-me-about-the-debt-en-331/).
- You have 30 days to dispute the debt in writing and the validation notice must also tell you the last date by which you can do so and must also state that unless the debtor (you) contacts them to dispute the debt or any portion of it within that time, the debt will be considered valid. You must also be told that if you dispute the debt within the 30 days, the debt collector will obtain what is called a “verification of the debt,” or if it has gone to court already and won, a copy of the court judgment. A copy of the verification or the judgment will be mailed to you. They must also tell you in the notice that if you ask for the name of the original creditor (which in the case of medical debt, would be the name of the hospital, doctor or other provider), they must provide you with the name and address. Appendix D-5 to this Manual contains a form letter for requesting debt validation information from a debt collector.
- There must also be a statement telling you that you can obtain more information about what protections there are against debt collectors by visiting the [Consumer Financial Protection Bureau website](https://www.consumerfinance.gov/consumer-tools/debt-collection/).

Debt collectors cannot try to collect the debt before providing you with the above information. Once they have done so, you have 30 days to dispute the debt in writing or it is deemed to be valid. _Disputing the debt is important not only because it preserves your ability to challenge its validity but also because it might make the creditor less likely to sue you by showing that you are willing to fight back, which will make any lawsuit longer and more expensive._ The same is true for getting a lawyer if you are able to do so. It might just make them decide that it is too much trouble to take you to court.

You need to review the debt information carefully to make sure the debt is one you actually owe, for health care services you actually received, and that the amount is correct, factoring in all payments made by you and by your insurer (to the provider), and that there are no added, duplicate or mystery charges. The Appendix to this Guide includes a form you can use to dispute the debt during the debt collection phase.

Keep all documents sent to you by a debt collector and write down dates and times of conversations with them along with notes of what was said, which could prove helpful if you meet with a lawyer or end up in court.

## Filing a Complaint with the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau:

If you are having trouble with a debt collector, including the failure of the collector to provide you with the required information, [you can file a complaint](https://www.consumerfinance.gov/complaint/) with the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB). The debt collector has two weeks to respond to your complaint before it is made public in the CFPB’s database.

Filing a complaint with the CFPB can help in two ways:

- It may lead to a swift resolution. Collection companies don’t want public complaints on file with the government, so they have a greater incentive to work with you to solve your comp
- It builds a record of the type of abuse and the specific companies prone to behave badly. This helps the government know how to better help and protect people against these practices and businesses

## An Additional Warning

##### Be wary of “debt elimination” or “debt relief” companies that advertise they can help you deal with debt. What they offer can be expensive, often does not work and, worst of all, they typically prevent you from properly defending against a debt collection action brought against you even if you have valid defenses.
